---
title: Merci Beaucoup! One Good Train Deserves Another.
posted: 2026-03-01
excerpt: This is the story of the "Merci Train." In the aftermath of World War II, amidst joy, celebration and the unbounded future hopes that characterized the American mindset, Europeans were starving. The war had crippled f...
slug: merci-beaucoup-one-good-train-deserves-another
---
This is the story of the "Merci Train." In the aftermath of World War II, amidst joy, celebration and the unbounded future hopes that characterized the American mindset, Europeans were starving. The war had crippled food production. Endless bombing of the continent’s roads, bridges, canals, and railways had destroyed transportation routes, making the transit of food and goods onerous. Drought had withered crops, further depleting what little food there was to ship anywhere. Two years after Germany surrendered, life in Europe had only worsened.
The Marshall Plan, enacted in 1948, transferred $13.3 billion in economic recovery programs from the U.S. to Western European economies to help restore their economic prosperity. But the Marshall Plan was government-to-government aid, aimed at infrastructural restoration. The people of Europe needed immediate, personal help just to survive on a day-to-day basis.
A widely known Washington journalist, Drew Pearson, proposed a train idea in his syndicated newspaper column, "Washington Merry-Go-Round". Other newspapers around the U.S. took up the cause. The concept was a train, crossing the United States from West to East, collecting on its way gifts of foodstuffs, medicines and personal supplies donated by the people of America for the French and Italian people. The train, with its cargo, was an undertaking independent of governmental support. It relied on free labor, donated goods from citizens, and free transport from railroads.
It was, in reality, two trains which followed, respectively, a northern and southern route east, stopping frequently along the way to pick up the personal contributions of everyday Americans. They collected enough food to fill two long freight trains. It was named the Friendship Train, and when it was packed it set sail for Europe from New York aboard a ship named The American Leader, which was ceremonially rechristened the Friend Ship for this voyage. It arrived in Le Havre in December 1947.
The French then reciprocated with a train of their own. The Merci Train was a train of French railroad box cars filled with tens of thousands of gifts of gratitude from French citizens. Forty-nine World War I era "40 and 8" rail cars, so called because they were built to transport 40 men or eight horses, were gifted to the United States in a show of their appreciation for the more than 700 American box cars of relief goods sent to them by (primarily) individual Americans.
Utah's boxcar from the 1949 French WW2 Merci (Gratitude) Train
The Merci Train arrived in New York harbor on February 3, 1949. Parades and ceremonies of welcome were conducted in the state capitols and major cities of almost all the states. In New York City more than 200,000 people turned out to welcome their box car.
The Merci Train's ("Gratitude Train") 49 boxcars were filled with thousands of, often handmade, tokens of appreciation from French citizens to Americans, including children’s toys (dolls, toy vehicles), household items (lace, ceramics), art, jewelry, books, and military medals. Many items were heartfelt, personal, or historically significant gifts.
A "40 and 8" car was distributed to each state. A 49th was shared by Washington D.C. and the then-Territory of Hawaii. Each one was adorned with a provincial coat of arms, a Great Seal of the United States, and a diagonal red, white, and blue stripe. States displayed them during massive welcoming parades and ceremonies, often featuring veterans and French dignitaries. (Most were later given to the American Legion’s Forty and Eight society for display in public parks, museums, and veterans’ sites.)
The cars’ contents—toys, children’s’ drawings, porcelains, high-fashion attire and heirlooms—were largely dispersed to local historical societies, showcased alongside their rail cars in local displays or in state museums, or divided among civic organizations.
Many of the handmade gifts were as simple as an embroidered cloth. Their simplicity spoke volumes about their sincerity. They had little to give but wanted to give something. They included childish drawings on rough yellowed paper, worn down wooden shoes, ashtrays made of broken mirrors, hand-crocheted doilies, battered toys, and bicycles, new and old.
And then there were gifts that were quite valuable: Fifty-plus rare paintings, the first motorcycle ever built, a Louis XV carriage, the original bust of Benjamin Franklin by the great French sculptor Jean Antoine Houdon, and the bugle that sounded at the signing of the World War I Armistice at Champagne in 1918. Other notable gifts: a church in LaCourtene gave up its bell, the city of Lyon provided dozens of silk wedding dresses, and one anonymous donor chipped in a set of black lingerie intended for a glamorous young lady.
North Carolina, like many states, held festivals and parades with military bands. In Texas, their rail car was moved by crane to a trailer, displayed at a hotel, and later moved to a railway station for public viewing.
Many states placed their rail cars in permanent locations to serve as memorials. Maryland's is housed indoors at the B&O Railroad Museum. Louisiana’s car is located under a pavilion at the Old State Capital Museum. Others, such as the Nevada car, were restored by the Forty and Eight Society and are on display at state railroad or history museums.
Vice President Alben Barkley speaking to a crowd gathered around a boxcar from the French "Merci" train in Washington, DC February 6, 1949.
Many states have fastidiously preserved their cars, such as Pennsylvania's at Indiantown Gap National Guard Post and Utah's at Ogden Union Station.
Over the decades, some fell into neglect, or were destroyed (like Connecticut's), or sold for scrap (Nebraska's). New Jersey's car went missing in 1958 and wasn't found again until 2024, in a Kansas City warehouse. Confirmed as authentic, it has been returned to be restored under the care of the United Railroad Historical Society of New Jersey.
Of the original 49 cars, 39 survive today, monuments to the enduring friendship between France (our new nation's first ally) and the United States.
Memories Light the Corners of My Mind
Random recollections from random wartime Internees at Christmas
Paul Galanti, USN
Heartbreak Hotel interrogation prison Hanoi
Each year the Christmas “celebration,” in four or five different prisons, went about the same. In 1972, several hundred of us were in a mountain camp near Lang Son near the Chinese border. It was somehow different. I remember thinking about the last eight Christmases – 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972 — all of them in WESTPAC on cruise or in POW camps. I thought, “You know, I’ve been here a long time (but felt better when I realized that I was a newcomer). Good grief, Alvarez has been here 22 months longer than I have. This is really a good sign." I thought, for the thousandth time, “we should be out of here in six months to a year.” I was wrong. We were home in less than two months. The next Christmas was much better!
William D. Jones, Army Air Corps
Dulag Luft, Stalag 17b Steyer, Austria
I was issued two blankets—one was a lace curtain, the other was part of a carpet. It was several weeks before I got my first pair of resoled GI shoes and the blankets replaced. For our 1944 Christmas Day meal we had our usual cup of hot water for breakfast, I had five potatoes, all the size of a quarter or less and hot water for supper. Each Combine of 10 men got a loaf of bread, which was divided into 10 slices. Trying to divide oddly shaped loaves of bread 10 ways was one of many problems.
John N. Powers, intelligence operations specialist
Vietnam
At Christmas, the guards might give the prisoners candy. In one case, the prisoners were given one can of condensed milk to share among the entire group of about twelve. This was likely not an example of a cruel joke, but an indication of the lack of food available to even the guards. Starvation was a major factor in deaths of POWs held in the South, either directly or by causing diseases incurred from a weakened immune system.
Robbie Wade Certain
Wife of Air Force Captain Robert Certain shot down during Operation Linebacker Hanoi
It was Christmas break, and I had gone home to have lunch with my parents. I had planned to pick Robert up in the morning hours of December 19. While I was eating lunch, my mother answered the phone and received news that military officers had been by my father's furniture store looking for him. Our salesman asked that my father stay home and wait until the officers arrived. At that point, I was sure something was wrong. I lost all interest in eating and began pacing the floor, pondering what could be going on. My parents were saying don't worry, but my stomach knew better.
Some time earlier, a pilot’s wife had told me to never worry until the white-top cars show up. Well, two white- top cars were sitting outside our front door with at least six officers inside. This was my worst nightmare coming true. Robert had been shot down over Hanoi and was classified as Missing in Action. I didn’t know that B52s were flying over North Vietnam. Robert had not warned me that he would not be home on the 18th although he was suspicious with all the activities going on in Guam. The whole world exploded, for me and other family members.
I was going to go lie down and rest a little when another phone call came in, with better news. Robert's Social Security number was being released by Radio Hanoi. The next morning Robert’s picture along with those of five other officers was published around the world in every major newspaper. We were all learning about the United States attack on Hanoi. This was the beginning of Linebacker II. The bombing runs lasted for 11 days. My husband just happened to be on the first airplane to go down over Hanoi and was the first one captured.
Richard A. Stratton USN
Hanoi Hilton Vietnam
The Hanoi government recognized that the war was going to be won by turning the American people against their own government. As a result, the communists had to put on a propaganda front acceptable to American dissidents.
Sometime in December 1967, well after dark, I was told to suit up in my "Mess Dress" striped-pajama prisoner uniform. Nothing good ever happened after dark. At bayonet point I was marched off into a weapons-carrier sized vehicle. I was very nervous. The last time a night time trip like this happened, another POW and I were similarly mounted up, driven to a soccer stadium, exposed to a howling, out-of-control crowd, assaulted in the vehicle and driven off to the Plantation Prison. This time I disembarked at what I found out later was the Hanoi Catholic Cathedral.
St. Joseph's Cathedral was one of the first structures built by the French colonial government in Indochina. With a Neo-Gothic architectural style said to resemble Notre Dame de Paris, it was opened in December 1886 and is the oldest church in Hanoi. Today there are nearly 4 million Catholics in Vietnam. St. Joseph, the father of Jesus, is considered the patron saint of Vietnam and Indochina.
I was marched into a side door near the rear of the church. They placed me half way down the nave on the Gospel side isolated from everyone else. The place looked like it could hold about 800 to 1,000 congregants. There were maybe 100 people in church. There were perhaps 10 other POWs also in their Mess Dress garb scattered about. The cameras were there.
The tabernacle was centrally located with a burning red candle clearly visible indicating the presence of the Blessed Sacrament. There was a Crucifix and it was where it belonged, centrally located above and behind the altar. Various and sundry Saints (Peter, Paul, Teresa, Francis Xavier) were all visible and identifiable.
The sanctuary exuded the tradition and magisterium of over 400 years. I was in a spiritual refuge. An interrogator barked at me: "Go visit the barn!" I was nonplussed but realized he meant the creche at the altar rail. I had no desire to contribute to the success of a propaganda effort, but since I was in a losing situation, I should try to get some benefit out of it. I saw one of our guys approaching the altar rail so I took off to join him. The VC wanted to keep us separated but could not overreact in front of the cameras.
We knelt there, side by side, and swapped information as to where we thought we were located, who was our SRO (Senior Ranking Officer), who was in our prisons and when we thought the war would be over.
After the Priest read the gospel of the day and gave a brief homily in Vietnamese, one of our more malicious interrogators, known as "The Rabbit," took the pulpit, and gave his English "Communist Christmas Sermon." Its essence was that baby Jesus, a good communist of a working-class family, being born into poverty, was persecuted by the capitalists. He and his family were forced to flee Bethlehem for their lives in their Jeep into Egypt to avoid the American Imperialists and the Yankee Air Pirates. It was a most inspiring sermon; it made one weep with laughter.
When Mass was over, the POWs were held in their places and then removed in such a way that they could not come in contact with each other. We had had one more shot to communicate at the Communion Rail after "the barn" visit, but then we were on our own. I was marched back up the center aisle towards the back doors and then pushed off to the left to exit a side door.
There was a group of Vietnamese crowded into the inside main entrance. A woman pushed a ten-year-old child towards me as I turned left. He came over and held my hand as I walked towards the left exit. My guard backhanded the youngster away from me. I went off by myself into the darkness.
John J. Crawford, U.S. Army
Stalag 9B, Bad Orb Germany
We marched for three days in the bitter cold. At night we slept huddled together to keep warm. We were finally packed into boxcars for more traveling. The group was bombed one night by the Allies, who did not know we were in the cars. Our Sergeant managed to climb out and open the doors and we all scrambled for cover until it was over. On Christmas day, we reached our destination, Stalag 9B, Bad Orb, Germany. My first meal was grass soup. Later we got potato soup, which was a little better. There was very little food, showers were few, and body lice were plentiful. After a shower, we put the same clothes back on. The toilet was a hole in the floor.
Stratton W. Beesley, Sr., Army Air Corps
Stalag Luft IV Germany
I remember well several things that happened during my eight month stay in Luft IV: the fellow Kriegie being shot by a German guard while sitting in a barracks window; the British prisoners being struck by lightning while living in the "hutments" that had been built in the center of Lager B; the electrocuted German hanging from a power pole on the perimeter of the compound; and especially the singing of Christmas Carols on Christmas Eve, 1944.
”Have yourself a merry, merry Christmas. Have yourself a good time. But remember the kids who got nothin,' While you're drinkin' down your wine. "Father Christmas" The Kinks, 1977
The History of Veterans Day
Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Public Affairs
World War I—known in its time as "The Great War"—officially ended with the Treaty of Versailles, signed June 28, 1919 in the Palace of Versailles outside the town of Versailles, France.
However, fighting ceased seven months earlier when an armistice, or temporary cessation of hostilities, between the Allied nations and Germany went into effect on the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month.
For that reason, November 11, 1918, is generally regarded as the end of "the war to end all wars."
In November 1919, President Wilson proclaimed November 11 as the first commemoration of Armistice Day with the following words: "To us in America, the reflections of Armistice Day will be filled with solemn pride in the heroism of those who died in the country's service and with gratitude for the victory, both because of the thing from which it has freed us and because of the opportunity it has given America to show her sympathy with peace and justice in the councils of the nations."
The original concept for the celebration was for a day observed with parades and public meetings and a brief suspension of business beginning at 11:00 a.m.
The United States Congress officially recognized the end of World War I when it passed a concurrent resolution on June 4, 1926, with these words:
- Whereas the 11th of November 1918, marked the cessation of the most destructive, sanguinary, and far reaching war in human annals and the resumption by the people of the United States of peaceful relations with other nations, which we hope may never again be severed, and
- Whereas it is fitting that the recurring anniversary of this date should be commemorated with thanksgiving and prayer and exercises designed to perpetuate peace through good will and mutual understanding between nations; and
- Whereas the legislatures of twenty-seven of our States have already declared November 11 to be a legal holiday: Therefore be it Resolved by the Senate (the House of Representatives concurring), that the President of the United States is requested to issue a proclamation calling upon the officials to display the flag of the United States on all Government buildings on November 11 and inviting the people of the United States to observe the day in schools and churches, or other suitable places, with appropriate ceremonies of friendly relations with all other peoples.
An Act (52 Stat. 351; 5 U. S. Code, Sec. 87a) approved May 13, 1938, made the 11th of November in each year a legal holiday, a day to be dedicated to the cause of world peace and to be thereafter celebrated and known as"Armistice Day."
TWO MINUTES BEFORE the armistice ending World War I will take effect, soldiers of the 353rd Infantry wait near a church at Stenay, Meuse in France. This photo was taken at 10:58 a.m., November 11, 1918,
Armistice Day was primarily a day set aside to honor veterans of World War I, but in 1954, after World War II had required the greatest mobilization of soldiers, sailors, Marines and airmen in the Nation's history and after the Korean conflict where American forces had fought aggression, the 83rd Congress, at the urging of veterans service organizations, amended the Act of 1938 by striking out the word "Armistice" and inserting in its place the word "Veterans."
Following approval of this legislation (Public Law 380) on June 1, 1954, November 11th became a day to honor American veterans of all wars.
Later that same year, on October 8th, President Dwight D. Eisenhower issued the first "Veterans Day Proclamation," which stated: "In order to insure proper and widespread observance of this anniversary, all veterans, all veterans' organizations, and the entire citizenry will wish to join hands in the common purpose. Toward this end, I am designating the Administrator of Veterans' Affairs as Chairman of a Veterans Day National Committee, which shall include such other persons as the Chairman may select, and which will coordinate at the national level necessary planning for the observance. I am also requesting the heads of all departments and agencies of the Executive branch of the Government to assist the National Committee in every way possible."
PRESIDENT EISENHOWER signing HR7786, changing Armistice Day to Veterans Day. From left: Alvin J. King, Wayne Richards, Arthur J. Connell, John T. Nation, Edward Rees, Richard L. Trombla, Howard W. Watts
On that same day, President Eisenhower sent a letter to the Honorable Harvey V. Higley, Administrator of Veterans Affairs (VA), designating him as Chairman of the Veterans Day National Committee.
In 1958, the White House advised VA's General Counsel that the 1954 designation of the VA Administrator as Chairman of the Veterans Day National Committee applied to all subsequent VA Administrators. Since March 1989 when VA was elevated to a cabinet level department, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs has served as the committee's chairman.
The Uniform Holiday Bill (Public Law 90-363 (82 Stat. 250)) was signed on June 28, 1968, and was intended to ensure three-day weekends for Federal employees by celebrating four national holidays on Mondays: Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Veterans Day, and Columbus Day. It was thought that these extended weekends would encourage travel, recreational and cultural activities and stimulate greater industrial and commercial production.
Many states did not agree with this decision and continued to celebrate the holidays on their original dates.
The first Veterans Day under the new law was observed with much confusion on October 25, 1971. It was quite apparent that the commemoration of this day was a matter of historic and patriotic significance to a great number of our citizens, and so on September 20th, 1975, President Gerald R. Ford signed Public Law 94-97 (89 Stat. 479), which returned the annual observance of Veterans Day to its original date of November 11, beginning in 1978. This action supported the desires of the overwhelming majority of state legislatures, all major veterans service organizations and the American people.
Veterans Day continues to be observed on November 11, regardless of what day of the week on which it falls. The restoration of the observance of Veterans Day to November 11 not only preserves the historical significance of the date, but helps focus attention on the important purpose of Veterans Day: A celebration to honor America's veterans for their patriotism, love of country, and willingness to serve and sacrifice for the common good.
Originally posted 11/2/15
