---
title: Remembering Our Veterans This Christmas Past
posted: 2024-02-08
excerpt: On a December morning back in 2008, six Christmas wreaths showed up in a package addressed to the Andersonville National Cemetery (a principal component of the Andersonville National Historic Site in southern Georgia,...
slug: remembering-our-veterans-this-christmas-past
---
On a December morning back in 2008, six Christmas wreaths showed up in a package addressed to the Andersonville National Cemetery (a principal component of the Andersonville National Historic Site in southern Georgia, which also encompasses the National Prisoner of War Museum and the Confederacy's historic and infamous Civil War prison site). For a moment nobody was sure why. After some brief confusion and closer inspection, it eventually became clear they had come from an organization called "Wreaths Across America."
And the purpose of the wreaths? They were to be placed at the graves at Andersonville's National Cemetery for the Christmas holidays as a way of honoring the sacrifice of the servicemen interred there. Thus began an annual practice, not just at Andersonville but at cemeteries across the country and around the world, of remembering America's war dead during the holiday season and rededicating her citizenry to the values that their dedication exemplified.
This past Christmas season, on December 14, volunteers and supporters at more than 4,225 participating locations in all 50 states, at sea and abroad placed wreaths on our veterans' graves at local, national and military cemeteries as well as at Veterans' Memorials and historic sites.
At Andersonville more than 20,000 veterans' graves were so honored last year. The wreaths donated for Wreaths Across America are produced at Worcester Wreath Co. of Harrington, Maine. Moving this cargo from Maine to Georgia is a complex process involving many hands. Each year the Bennett Family of Companies of McDonough, GA, and their charitable arm, the Taylor Family Foundation, provide the five tractor trailer trucks and truckers needed to transport the wreaths from Maine to Georgia. They also raise a sizable amount of the funds to purchase the wreaths in conjunction with their partner, Truist Bank.
Unloading the trucks and handling the freight was accomplished with help from South Georgia Technical College which provided forklifts and operators. A Bennett executive serves as organizational lead for the project each year.
Friends of Andersonville, a non-profit corporation that provides financial support to the Andersonville historic prison site, the National Cemetery, and the National POW Museum through endowment grants, and the AXPOW organization also made significant contributions to the project through the purchase of wreaths.
Finally, volunteers have to be recruited and trained for the respectful and somber process of placing the wreaths as well as the often-unnoted task of gathering and disposing of the wreaths later in January. Volunteers come together to attend a short ceremony where they are instructed on how to place each wreath, taking care to say aloud the veteran's name at each grave.
In this most recent ceremony, more than 2,000 volunteers came to Andersonville to place wreaths. Three recent burials were notably honored: Corporal Luther Story, Korean War Medal of Honor Recipient and MIA for 73 years, Captain Jerry Riddle US Army and Specialist Desmond Campbell US Army.
All told, last year 2.7 million veterans’ wreaths were placed at sites like Andersonville across the country and abroad. And more than two million volunteers participated. More than a third of those volunteers were children.
