---
title: Song Book
posted: 2021-11-05
excerpt: In 1697 the British poet and playwright William Congreve penned what would become the most misquoted famous line in the history of English literature. In his play The Mourning Bride he makes a broad characterization o...
slug: song-book
---
In 1697 the British poet and playwright William Congreve penned what would become the most misquoted famous line in the history of English literature. In his play The Mourning Bride he makes a broad characterization of the power of music over the human condition: Musick has Charms to sooth a savage Breast, To soften Rocks, or bend a knotted Oak.
What has come down to us today from that elegant phrasing, literally more often than not, is "Music has charms to soothe the savage beast." And this is a not just a casual disservice.
First, truncating the line loses the full scope of its meaning, vastly constricting the broad arc of the author's intent. He wasn't just trying to say music is a good sedative, he was saying music has multifarious, almost magical charms. Acting as a soporific for a creature's dyspeptic excesses is only one of them and probably not even the most magical.
And second, he wasn't talking about animals.
A writer of his pedigree deserves more punctilious treatment by posterity. You may never have heard of William Congreve, but he was no fluke. Later in the same play he offered up another gem with enduring luster. "Heaven has no rage like love to hatred turned, / Nor hell a fury like a woman scorned." Two in one play! Positively Shakespearian. You knew who he was without even knowing who he was.
But mankind down through the ages did not need poetry to discern the ineffable interaction between the human psyche and the transformative power of music. It always had been and always will be recognized as a tonic for every range of circumstances confronting the human condition, even—maybe especially—war.
In America our wars have begotten catalogs of melodies that spoke to us, from rousing hymnals to both cheering and consoling ditties, and served to help both soldiers and their loved ones left at home to endure the struggles and uncertainties of their times.
Attention Amazon Shoppers!
Make any purchase through the Amazon Smile charity portal, and they'll make a donation to AXPOW—at no cost to you! Just use the link above, and designate part of your purchase price to help fund our POW support activities.
Try it next time you make a buy on Amazon. It's painless. It makes shopping more satisfying. And you'll help a great cause!
A fair number are barely if at all remembered, some not even widely dispersed far from their region of origin. Lost in the human clutter of time. After all, music as a business grew up pretty much alongside our country. There may have been catalogs but there was little hard copy storage at first. Before the American Revolution, popular music was pretty much an oral tradition. Most people's exposure to published music was confined to church, occasional concerts and local stage productions, and family and communal traditions.
Musical notation, written-down notes and tunes, was developed even before parchment or paper. A cuneiform tablet of musical notation dating back to 2000 BC was discovered in what is today modern Iraq and/or Syria. But until the 15th century all musical notation was produced by hand and obviously not very widely distributed. The first printed sheet music wasn't pulled off the presses until 1473.
The late 19th century saw a massive explosion of "parlor music," which generated growing interest in popular music, not to mention ownership of pianos and the wide dissemination of sheet music. And also piano lessons for children.
Thomas Edison invented the phonograph in 1877, but by the early 20th century recorded music and its broad popular consumption hadn't yet arrived. Then in the 1920s came commercial radio broadcasting. People knew not only all the songs but how they were really supposed to sound. This improved their singing but also encouraged a finer appreciation for just plain listening to music and enjoying its benefits on an intimate, personal level.
Not surprisingly, that evolution can be traced through steady changes in the role and style of popular songs in American culture, from one war to the next.
The Civil War
Two songs most closely associated today with the Civil War, possibly thanks to Elvis Presley, are "Dixie" and "The Battle Hymn of the Republic." Maybe even back then.
The former is now broadly associated with the Confederate cause, although the song was written as a minstrel piece well before the onset of the war and enjoyed broad popularity on both sides of the Mason-Dixon Line. It was a personal favorite of Abraham Lincoln, who had it played frequently at political rallies and also following the White House announcement of Lee's surrender. Lincoln, born in Kentucky, called it "one of the best tunes I ever heard."
The latter was an unabashed paean to the Union's opposition to the institution of slavery, written in 1861 for that purpose. The lyrics were the work of the abolitionist writer Julia Ward Howe put to the tune of "John Brown's Body."
Civil War Sing-Along
(Click song title to play.)
Both songs could be, indeed were at the time, seen as anthems for their respective sympathies, "cause-related" songs espousing the existential ideals of their respective sides, and, at least in the case of "Battle Hymn," brimming with rectitude. "Dixie" was seen more as a song about pride of place, but just as serious an expression of sectarian loyalty and constancy.
American composer and bandmaster Patrick Sarsfield wrote "When Johnny Comes Marching Home" in 1863, early in the war, while serving in the Union Army. Like many people at the time, the author expected the Civil War to end much sooner than it did. The song was immensely popular and was also sung by both sides, but as the war dragged on, its relevance faded.
But by the time of the Spanish American War (1898) it was a national hit again, its triumphal temper no doubt easier to savor in a war where the enemy's naval fleet was entirely destroyed in a single battle.
Songs of a more personal nature, reflecting on the war's cost, casualties and personal loss certainly existed, but the thematic musical mainstream of America in the mid-19th century tended towards the martial and aspirational.
A very popular song outside of this mainstream, expressing grief over the price of patriotism, was written by a southern sympathizing Canadian musician. But "The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down" was penned in 1970. Not so many philosophical odes like it written at the actual time of the war. Distress in that time was more likely to take the form of rage than sorrow, in the public square at least. Joan Baez's version peaked at #3 on the Hot 100 on October 2, 1971. She had nothing to do with the original composition and even got the lyrics wrong in a couple of spots. But pretty voice.
World War I
The U.S. was slow to enter the First World War. Fighting first broke out in the summer of 1914 between the "Central Powers," led by Germany and Austria-Hungary, and the "Allied Countries," Britain, France, and Russia. America was on the sidelines at the start. President Woodrow Wilson, elected two years before, was committed to American neutrality. He campaigned for reelection in 1916 on the slogan "He kept us out of war."
World War I Sing-Along
(Click song title to play.)
On May 7, 1915, a German U boat sank the British ocean liner Lusitania, killing more than 1,100 people including 128 Americans. In 1917, early in Wilson's second term, Germany greatly increased its attacks on American merchant ships and also attempted to meddle in U.S.-Mexican relations. This was enough to draw Wilson into the war on the side of the Allies. He called on Congress to declare war on Germany on April 6, 1917.
Understandably, the war songs Americans heard on their Victrolas and newly acquired living room radio consoles at first bore a distinctly British or even French influence. The British style of war song was typically martial and upbeat, bursting with jaw-thrusting optimism. America's favorite songwriting patriot, George M. Cohan shortly rang up an American entry that did them all one better.
"Over There" typified Cohan's personal brand of super-confident, unflappable, "can-do" Yankee patriotism. It was an instant hit and galvanized the nation. It boosted enlistments and had sold two million copies of sheet music and one million recordings by war's end. Cohan was later awarded a special Congressional Medal of Honor.
But in an age when popular music in general was blossoming, America's wartime musical tastes were beginning to change. "Till We Meet Again" tells the story of a soldier and his sweetheart parting as he heads off to the front. It became a sentimental favorite towards the close of the war. It was recorded by Henry Burr and Albert Campbell and in 1919 was declared the number one song of that year. And it had legs. It was subsequently recorded by at least 77 artists, including Doris Day, Bing Crosby and Patti Page.
"Keep the Home Fires Burning," called by some War I’s greatest anthem, gained the hearts of the British public from its first public performance. By February 1916 over a million copies of the sheet music had been sold, and the song had been translated into at least six languages.
The words to "Bless 'Em All" were written by one Fred Godfrey from his experiences while serving with the Royal Naval Air Service in 1916 at Dunkirk during the First World War. At least that's his story. More likely he just wrote the words down. In point of fact, records suggest he didn't even join the RNAS until the following year. The song is thought to have originated in different versions, some quite salacious, as a popular protest song among airmen serving on India's Northwest Frontier.
Far from being the cheerful expression of good wishes to the military bureaucracy they're often taken for, the lyrics offer a derisive "so long" from jaded "time-expired" men to the officers and non-coms who made their lives miserable during their just-completed tour and a sarcastic "good luck" to their innocent, dewy-eyed replacements.
It wasn't recorded until 1940 and gained wide popularity, with some sanitized lyrics, among troops throughout the British Commonwealth and the general public during World War II. Others have also claimed authorship of the lyrics. The music, it is generally agreed, was composed by Robert Kewley.
World War II
By the 1940s America's musical mood was clearly turning much more up-close and personal. World War II's wartime music began to lean more toward feelings and emotion, romance and just "smiling through" in lieu of patriotic memes and morale-boosting. Not that patriotic and institutional songs disappeared from the scene.
He'd already made a songwriting name for himself in WWI with "Oh, How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning," but Irving Berlin would become World War II's George M. Cohan, memorably adding "God Bless America" and "This is the Army" to the national playlist. The former he, too, had penned back in 1918 as a young recruit but set it aside. In 1938, he revised it as a peace song (and what he called a prayer of thanks from a grateful immigrant), and it was introduced on a 20th anniversary WWI Armistice Day celebration radio broadcast, sung by Kate Smith.
World War II Sing-Along
(Click song title to play.)
Smith and the patriotic fervor she stirred during World War II contributed mightily to the sale of over $600 million ($10.6 billion in today's terms) in war bonds during her marathon radio broadcasts. No other show-business star came near her as a War Bond revenue producer. And there were many trying.
Smith's star was dimmed in 2019 by criticism that songs done earlier in her career were racist in character. One was a 1931 rendition of "That’s Why Darkies Were Born." The other, a 1933 recording of "Pickaninny Heaven," made reference to watermelons. The New York Yankees discontinued playing her rendition of "God Bless America" during the seventh inning stretch of home games, and the Philadelphia Fliers removed the statue in Smith's honor that stood in front of their ice arena.
Both the revelation and the response may have been an overheated case of political correctness. The songs, while clearly patronizing by today's standards some 90 years later, hardly oozed racial disparagement. The first had been popularized by Paul Robeson, who, granted, may have been in a better position to carry it off. The second was from the movie Hello, Everybody! one of whose writers was Fannie Hurst.
It never remotely occurred to anyone to call either of those artists bigoted. The offending lyrics in retrospect appear more a reflection of an era than of racial animus. Smith herself gave an address espousing racial tolerance on CBS Radio in 1945. O tempora o mores.
Then there were the Andrews Sisters: Maxene, LaVerne, and Patty. They were already popular music headliners when the war began who remade themselves as Uncle Sam's boogie-woogie ambassadors extraordinaires, entertaining Allied forces extensively on bases in Africa, Italy and the U.S.
They too promoted war bond sales, with a rendition of Irving Berlin's song "Any Bonds Today?" They also helped actress Bette Davis and actor John Garfield found California's famous Hollywood Canteen, volunteering their time to sing and dance for visiting servicemen. They volunteered their time at the New York Servicemen's Canteen as well.
Their signature wartime hit, "Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy," introduced in the 1941 Abbott and Costello film Buck Privates reached number six on the U.S. pop singles chart and is ranked No. 6 on the Recording Industry Association of America's "Songs of the Century" list.
In 1944, the U.S. Office of Strategic Services (OSS) initiated a series of musical propaganda broadcasts designed to demoralize enemy soldiers. They asked Marlene Dietrich to record a number of songs in German for the project and she readily agreed.
Dietrich, German-born but living in America since 1930, was by the time of the war a well-established Hollywood star. She had become an American citizen in 1939 and was appalled by Nazism.
One of her songs, "Lili Marleen" as it was titled then, became a massive success, not least on German-language OSS radio, where it was the station's theme song.
In addition to her OSS recordings, during 1944 and '45 Dietrich performed "Lili Marlene" extensively abroad while entertaining some half a million allied troops and war prisoners across North Africa and Europe, including in Germany. Filmmaker Billy Wilder once quipped she was on the front lines more than Eisenhower.
She re-recorded the song in 1944, and versions were released on Decca Records in the US and internationally, in both English and German, as "Lili Marlene, like her own name. She spread the tune all over the United States and Europe, via both radio performances and live shows. (Her original OSS recording remains to this day unissued.)
But Dietrich was actually late to the party with Lili Marlene. The first to record it, as "Lili Marlen," was a German singer, Lale Andersen, in 1939. Initial sales were not encouraging: only 700 copies. But that was to change, albeit by chance. After the Nazis overran Yugoslavia, Radio Belgrade, recommissioned as the German forces' radio station, commenced to playing the song over and over, primarily because of a lack of other recordings. And it quickly caught on with German soldiers throughout Europe and North Africa.
All except with Nazi propaganda Chief Joseph Goebbels. He didn't care for the song, the story goes, because it wasn't a march (how like a Nazi) and because he didn't like the German songstress, who, it was rumored, associated with Jews and openly criticized the Nazi regime. Gossip like that did a girl's musical career no good in Germany at that time.
But Radio Belgrade was getting bushels of letters from Axis soldiers all over Europe and Africa asking them to play it again. Allies, too, heard the broadcasts and were just as captivated. Many Allied soldiers made a point of tuning into Radio Belgrade just to listen to "Lili Marlen" at the end of each day.
Whoever that girl back home was that it reminded them all of, she must have really been something.
But Goebbels, undaunted, still wanted the song banned. However, the story continues, it turned out General Erwin Rommel, commander of the Afrika Korps, Germany's "Desert Fox," was one of "Lili Marlen's" many, many fans and "requested" of the radio station that it be played for his troops every night. So Goebbels backed off, and the song became Radio Belgrade’s signature sign-off, every night at 9:55 p.m.
And so it was that by the end of World War II, "Lili Marlene," thanks to two unlikely "Krauts" and one unlikely "Yank," was said to be, by whatever name, the most popular song in the world.
Vietnam
Wartime music in the '60s was a different affair. It was a frenetic time: civil rights struggles (sometimes tragically violent), generational mistrust, Watergate, unusually rebellious youth for whom Vietnam was an unpopular war, a disaffected drop-out culture and rampant mind-altering drug usage. In the words of Bob Dylan, "There was music in the cafes at night and revolution in the air."
How frenetic really? Consider that the Moon Walk, Chappaquiddick, the Manson murders and Woodstock all took place within weeks of each other in the summer of 1969. A year later, four students were killed and nine others wounded at Kent State University by Ohio National Guard troops. As it always does, the music of the times largely reflected those times. Often hostile and antagonistic. (When it wasn't about surfing and fast cars: this is popular music we're talking about.)
A hint of what was in store came in a little noted and probably poorly remembered 1966 song by Simon and Garfunkel. This uncomplicated and melodious young duo was hardly a protest act, and "7 o'clock News / Silent Night" was hardly a protest song. It provided an ironic interplay between the events of a typically disconcerting (and real) daily news report and the dreamy mood of a peaceful Christmas Carol.
The disjunction might be cheekily described in modern times as a "woke" moment. It was a harbinger of where we were going with Vietnam and the other thorny concerns of those tense times. Merry Christmas.
Creedance Clearwater Revival was a hot vocal group throughout the '60s and '70s and reputedly a huge favorite among servicemen in Vietnam as well as young people back home. A number of its songs, like "Who'll Stop the Rain," "Run Through the Jungle," "Bad Mood Rising," and Fortunate Son," were received by fans as more or less coded allegories about the war in southeast Asia.
John Fogerty, the band's front man, lead guitarist and principal songwriter, dispelled those beliefs. His songs often evoked an air of apocalyptic unease, but the source of the angst wasn't generally Vietnam. The first was about Fogerty's fears, eventually confirmed, over his band breaking up; the second was an alarmum about growing gun violence in America; and the third he was inspired to write after watching the movie The Devil and Daniel Webster.
The fourth song, "Fortunate Son," actually dealt with class distinctions in American society. In much the same vein as Bruce Springsteen's "Born in the USA," released in 1984. Both songs had inferential ties to Vietnam (as in, the fortunate sons were not in Vietnam fighting) but those inferences were tangential to the core message of either song.
"Galveston," a song written by Jimmy Webb and popularized by American country music singer Glen Campbell, was unarguably about Vietnam, without ever mentioning the war by name. In 2003, it ranked number 8 in the 100 Greatest Songs in Country Music and number 1 on the country music charts. It reached number 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the "Easy Listening" charts. It was certified gold by the RIAA in October 1969. Not bad for an unnamed war song.
"Ballard of the Green Berets" was a popular song that unabashedly cast both Vietnam and the military in a positive light. And was well-received for it. In 1966 it reached the No. 1 spot for five weeks on the Hot 100 and four weeks on Cashbox. It also reached No. 1 on Billboard's Easy Listening chart and No. 2 on Billboard's Country survey. "Ballard of the Green Berets" and "California Dreamin'" by the Mommas and the Papas were tied for #1 in the Cashbox end-of-year survey for 1966.
Tony Orlando and Dawn's "Tie a Yellow Ribbon 'Round the Old Tree" is about a man returning from prison, not Vietnam. But soldiers in-country appeared to relate to it in a big way just the same. The shoe fit, so to speak.
The origin of the yellow ribbon as a badge of constancy likely dates back to the 19th-century practice of women wearing a yellow ribbon in their hair to signify devotion to a husband or sweetheart serving in the U.S. Cavalry, which may have inspired the John Wayne movie "She Wore a Yellow Ribbon."
Vietnam War Sing-Along
(Click song title to play.)
Their single made the top 10 song list in ten countries, and in eight of them it topped the chart.
According to the Folklife Reading Room of the Library of Congress, even though the song was released in 1973, there's no actual record of yellow ribbons appearing during the Vietnam War or any other conflict pre-1980. The tradition didn't surface broadly until 1980, when 52 American embassy workers were taken hostage in Iran.
One theory argues that the yellow ribbon as a modern sympathetic symbol began in 1975 with Gail Magruder, wife of Watergate figure Jeb Magruder. She put yellow ribbons around her porch to welcome her husband home from prison.
A senior member of Richard Nixon's Committee to Reelect the President, Magruder pled guilty to a single-count indictment for his role in the botched Watergate Hotel burglary and ensuing cover-up. He was sentenced by Judge John Sirica to a term of ten months-to-four years, of which he served seven months. And his wife was at home waiting for him, with a lot of yellow ribbon. Nobody really thought Magruder was the brains of the operation. He went on to become a Presbyterian minister.
Another song favorite of soldiers in Vietnam was "We Gotta Get Out of This Place" by raucous British rockers The Animals, fronted by the booming-voiced Eric Burton. The connection is obvious enough, but in plain fact, the song had absolutely nothing to do with the War in Vietnam. Another Animals recording, "The House of the Rising Sun," was also very popular in the camps in the Delta. Same with Jimmy Hendrix, who reputedly avoided Vietnam by pretending he was gay. (He was also known to have strong anti-communist sympathies.) Sometimes they just liked the music.
A modern-day interpretation of William Congreve tailored for the adolescent mind:prepared by Sir Elton John and Bryan Adams.
